---
Title: "Simulating Planetary Orbits Part 1: History of the n-body Problem"
Date: 2025-09-10
---


## Gravitation and Solar System-Stability
### Predicting the Next Solar Eclipse (and the 1,000 Following It)
If you are reading this in September of 2025, the next total solar eclipse the Earth will experience will occur on August 12, 2026. If you're planning on making the most out of your eclipse viewing experience, you'll also want to know which regions fall under the eclipse's central path. For the August 2026 solar eclipse, these regions are Greenland, Iceland and Spain. But what about readers who might've missed the August 2026 solar eclipse (and quite a few after that), and are now reading this in September of 2995? 30th century readers can safely bet that the next optimal solar eclipse viewing experience will occur on January 11, 2996, near Smyley Island, Antarctica. If current climate trends continue, it'll likely be quite a pleasant vacation spot by then.

So how are we able to predict the time and place of such distant astronomical events with such precision? While these two dates come from NASA astrophysicist Fred Espenak's [Five Millennium Catalog of Solar Eclipses](https://eclipse.gsfc.nasa.gov/SEcat5/SEcatalog.html), whom we will discuss more in depth later, his work is the computational result of a remarkably stable and predictable orbital system. Every day, every month, and every year, we intuitively expect the distances traveled by the Earth and the Moon to be consistent. So consistent in fact, that we might even describe the solar system as a sort of celestial timepiece. This description however, fails to fully convey the depth of the relationship between the heavens and timekeeping. It is in fact the solar system, and in particular the Sun-Earth-Moon system, which is the model timepiece after which all others are fashioned. Our very discretization of time into seconds, minutes and hours is based upon the motion of celestial bodies. 

### Birth of the *n*-body Problem
In 1687, Isaac Newton published his [*Principia*](https://archive.org/details/newtonspmathema00newtrich/page/n7/mode/2up) which included his first formulation of his universal law of gravitation. In it, he shows that the only central force that conforms to [Kepler's First Law](http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/kepler.html) is one that weakens with the inverse square of distance $F \propto 1/r^2$. He also proves that any force that weakens with the inverse square of distance must generate orbits shaped as conic sections. This was of course a major breakthrough in the study of planetary motion, and something Newton would use to synthesize his law of universal gravitation later in his work. However, Newton found that the predicted orbits, which only use the Sun as the central body, often deviated to varying degrees from the actual observed orbits. Newton concluded that every massive body in the solar system was exerting a gravitational force on the others, and that these gravitational interaction forces were perturbing the orbits of the planets. Newton's exploration into the complexities of the moon's orbit was perhaps the first foray into the *n*-body problem as we know it today. In particular, Newton was attempting to solve the 3-body problem of the Sun-Earth-Moon system. The complexity of such a task was so immense that Newton later confessed it was the only problem that ever 'made his head ache and kept him awake,' an anecdote famously recounted in Richard S. Westfall's definitive biography, [Never at Rest](https://archive.org/details/neveratrestbiogr0000west). As a fix, he develops perturbation theory, which allows him to represent an approximate solution to the problem as a power series. This method allowed Newton to properly predict planetary motion annually. However, he despairs at the long-term implications of these perturbations. Were they on average zero, and thus irrelevant to the overall motion of the system? Or would they accumulate over time and eventually drive bodies completely off course? 

#### A Divine Explanation for Instability?
Newton eventually decided on the latter, writing in his [*Opticks*](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/33504/33504-h/33504-h.htm),
> For while Comets move in very eccentric Orbs in all manner of Positions, blind Fate could never make all the Planets move one and the same way in Orbs concentric, some inconsiderable Irregularities excepted which may have risen from the mutual Actions of Comets and Planets upon one another, and which will be apt to increase, till this System wants a Reformation. Such a wonderful Uniformity in the Planetary System must be allowed the Effect of Choice.

In Newton's view, God played an active role in maintaining the order of the universe, correcting it from time to time. His usage of the term "Reformation" was no coincidence, but perfectly mirrored the behavior of human societies. In ["Irenicum"](https://www.newtonproject.ox.ac.uk/view/texts/normalized/THEM00003), he writes,
> These two commandments always have and always will be the duty of all nations, and the coming of Jesus Christ has made no alteration in them. For as often as mankind has swerved from them, God has made a reformation...

By synthesizing his theological and scientific views, Newton concluded that there was nothing inherently stable about the motion of the planets. He resigns himself instead to faith in God's power at maintaining the course of the planets, just as God might correct the course of humanity whenever it went astray. In *Principia* he even goes as far as to imply that the *n*-body problem is unsolvable. However, Newton would not have the final word, and his work would continue the debate about solar system-stability, the *n*-body problem, and the nature of the universe, for centuries to come.

### The Solar System-Stability Debate and The Clockwork Universe
While Newton may have believed in a Supreme Being's active maintenance of the universe, his work, which provided a mechanistic basis for the motion of the planets, birthed a generation of thinkers who criticized these exact conclusions. The analogy of the universe to a mechanical timepiece had long existed, even being referenced by Newton himself at times. Newton's contemporaries, however, created a more comprehensive and self-contained concept known as the clockwork universe. In the clockwork universe paradigm, the universe is not just some timepiece but rather, a perfect timepiece, wound only once in the beginning of existence, and perfectly moving for all time. Proponents of the clockwork universe included both devout Christians as well as deists. One of these proponents was Gottfried Leibniz, often credited as co-founder of calculus alongside Newton. In the [Leibniz-Clarke correspondence](https://archive.org/details/leibnizclarkecor00clar/page/n5/mode/2up), in which Leibniz and Samuel Clarke, an early supporter of Newtonian physics, debate many of Newton's ideas, Leibniz writes,
>Sir Isaac Newton, and his Followers, have also a very odd Opinion concerning the Work of God. According to their Doctrine, God Almighty wants to wind up his Watch from Time to Time: Other-wise it would cease to move. He had not, it seems, sufficient Fore-sight to make it a perpetual Motion. Nay, the Machine of God’s making, is so imperfect, according to these Gentlemen; that he is obliged to clean it now and then by an extraordinary Concourse, and even to mend it, as a Clockmaker mends his Work; Who must consequently be so much the more unskilful a Workman, as he is oftner obliged to mend his Work and to set it right.

Leibniz, himself a Christian, like Newton, clearly took a different view. Would God not create a perfect machine to govern the cosmos? He found the notion that God would create something imperfect, having to mend it on occasion, absurd. This view was certainly not unpopular. In fact, Newton's ideas were quite controversial. Nevertheless, the question of eternal stability had not yet been proven either way. In the following decades, scientists and mathematicians continued to search for an answer to the solar system-stability problem. While a useful solution to the *n*-body problem remained elusive, mathematicians and astronomers further developed perturbation theory, developing increasingly accurate convergent series. 

In the late 19th century, French mathematician Henri Poincaré set out to find the solution to the *n*-body problem. Poincaré was exceptionally talented at examining the qualitative behavior of differential equations. Using these methods, he was able to prove that the perturbation theory will fail at some point. Before him, astronomers presumed that perturbation theory would generate series that exclusively converged to stable, periodic orbits. Poincaré was able to show that with even the smallest alteration to initial conditions, these series would provide wildly different behaviors or even diverge. Poincaré's findings would birth the field of Chaos Theory, and divide the interests of mathematicians and dynamical astronomers for decades. While mathematicians continued to study chaotic systems in isolation, astronomers continued to develop perturbation theory for orbits they understood to be regular and periodic. The true impact of chaos within the solar system and the galaxy at large would not be appreciated for many more decades...

### Computer Simulations: The Key to Understanding *n*-Body Systems
The advent of computers truly revolutionized the way in which the *n*-body problem was handled, and helped astronomers truly appreciate the disruption that chaos brought. In 1962, French astronomer Michel Hénon, while visiting Princeton University, began using computers to simulate star orbits. Star Orbits are quite similar to planetary orbits, except that rather than almost all mass of the system being at the center, galaxies are discs of distributed mass. Computer simulations, like Hénon's, allow for the numerical integration of dynamical systems over very long periods of time, a major shift from the perturbation series astronomers were using to plot out orbits by hand. Like most astronomers of his time, Hénon assumed orbits to be periodic. His simulations showed something else entirely. Many of them would form complex loops, then scatter entirely, with no curve even fitting them. Hénon was visualizing the true impact of chaos.

Understanding the historical struggle to determine solar system-stability and solve the *n*-body problem helps one understand that computer simulation, rather than being merely an accessible way to visualize a physics problem, is fundamental to the very understanding of planetary and stellar behavior over millions of years. When programming an *n*-body simulation, it's important to remember that the computer simulation isn't just a model in the shadow of analytical models. Rather, it is the method through which one gains insight. In the decades since Hénon and the earliest computer simulations of *n*-body systems, astronomers have fully modeled about 60 million years of the solar system's future. Fred Espenak made use of computer simulation to predict a millenium of solar and lunar eclipses. Some researchers have even found stabilizing structures preventing the fast destabilization of the inner terrestrial planets, echoing Newton's intuition that hidden forces preserve cosmic order—even if the explanation is natural rather than divine.

## Further Reading / Sources
* [Chaos: Making a New Science](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/64582.Chaos)
* [The Final Piece in the Solar System-Stability Puzzle?](https://physics.aps.org/articles/v16/72)
* [Irenicum](https://www.newtonproject.ox.ac.uk/view/texts/normalized/THEM00003)
* [Kepler's Laws](http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/kepler.html)
* [The Leibniz-Clarke correspondence : together with extracts from Newton's Principia and Opticks](https://archive.org/details/leibnizclarkecor00clar/page/n5/mode/2up)
* [NASA Eclipse Website](https://eclipse.gsfc.nasa.gov/eclipse.html)
* [*Opticks*](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/33504/33504-h/33504-h.htm)
* [*Newton's Principia: The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy*](https://archive.org/details/newtonspmathema00newtrich/page/n7/mode/2up)
* [Never at Rest](https://archive.org/details/neveratrestbiogr0000west)
* [*Poincaré and the Three-Body Problem*](https://oro.open.ac.uk/57403/1/335423.pdf)
* [Tackling the Puzzle of Our Solar System’s Stability](https://physics.aps.org/articles/v16/57)




